Various text boxes meant for the submission:


* Name:          
 [Market your product]
BaySim

* Tagline: 
  [Explain your software in a tweetable sentence.]
Simulating the Bay: complexity made understandable


* Description:
  [Tell the story behind the code. What inspired you? Who is your target user? What key features are you most proud of? ]

Ecosystems are complex by their very nature.  The importance of the
right balance between numerous components is often hard to understand.
Builders want more buildings. Homeowners want to be close to the
water. Crabbers want more crab.  Yet, we clearly can't have more of
everything. People often don't understand the relationship among the
components of the ecosystem and the delicate balance needed to keep
things functioning.

Both developers have a long history building rich visual and
interactive simulations, and we were motivated by a Hackathon
"consultant" from MDE who suggested building a Bay simulation. We were
inspired by the popular games of SimCity and MineCraft as they both
show how the richness of the simulation and interactivy is more
important than visual realism to convey complexity.

The goal of this project is to help students understand the complexity
of the Chesapeake Bay ecosystem, and the nature of the relationships
among components. We anticipate that BaySim would work well as a kiosk
in an information center, or as an enabling technology in the
classroom for middle or high school students.

We think the interactive and visual nature of the simulation makes it
unusally engaging and understandable.  We proud that we were able to
create a fully functional multi-platform (Windows, Mac & Linux)
prototype during the hackathon by building on one of the developer's
previous educational simulation environment.  The code is open source
and available on GitHub. It is clearly structured and has parameters
that will make it easy for other developers to modify it to create
their versions of the simulation and adapt as they see fit.  We also
used a very flexible model for the bay itself by providing the data in
the form of a simple text file with elevations so the simulation could
be readily adapted to other regions.


Some technical background:

1) We first had to find a (raster based) dataset that describes the
elevations in both land and sea, and then combined and calibrated the
separate sea and land dataset. We were surprised that this kind of
dataset did not exist. By defining our simulated region by just
elevation data, the simulation can work without change to the code
simply by changing the data file.

2) The "SimCity" style code that runs the simulation was adapted from
a UMD class that one of the developers (Bederson) developed last year
to teach Python to non-computer science majors
(http://www.cs.umd.edu/~bederson/classes/paths-f13/).  That simulation
was much simpler and had randomly generated terrain and no sense of
pollution, crabs, etc. But the basic simulation mechanism existed
which let us focus on adding the details of the Bay ecology to the
simulation such as the previously mentioned elevation lab, buildings,
pollution run-off, crabs, etc.  In addition, by controlling the river
input and evaporation rates, the impact on water level can be
investigated, thus showing the impact of changing sea levels.

3) The current prototype is written in Python which enables it to run
as a downloadable app on Windows, Macs or Linux laptops and
desktops. However, we envision that BaySim could be rewritten for the
web using standard web technologies (without plugins) so that it could
run on any device, including phones and tablets simply by loading a
web page. This would enable new modes of collaboration and competition
across devices that we think could make BaySim even more exciting!

** Various screenshots and zip files/pdf files etc.etc. can be attached 
   and added to the submission
   
